Syllabus Day
===================
August 24, 2015
SJSU, CS47

### Why are we here? ###
This class is mostly about general computer systems. It wouldn't be unusual for other majors to be here, most industries would benifit from this info.

### Who's the instructor? ###
Kaushik Patra | 408-924-5161 | kaushik.patra@sjsu.edu

[www.linkedin.com/in/kpatra]

Currently works at Mentor. Big in the EDA industry.

### Class Logistics ###
Office hours: M/W 4:30 pm - 5:45 pm in DH282

Use Canvas for correspondance [www.sjsu.edu/at/ec/canvas/]. Make sure it forwards to your email as well.

Get proof of equivalency to CS46B by 8/26. You'll be dropped otherwise.

All emails to instructor must have the subject line start with _[CS-47],01_ and be send to the SJSU email ID only. No 'hi' or 'hey' in emails. No first name basis. Emails should be professional. If formatted properly, you'll get a prompt response.

### Grading ###
There will be 2 homeworks and 1 project (worth big points). Submit project reports in IEEE format:[www.ieee.org/conferences_events/conferences/publishing/templates.html].

Should include:
- Intro
- Requirement
- Design and Implementation
- Testing
- Conclusion

One midterm and the final exam (also worth big points).

Basically, work hard on the few assignments we have and nail the exams.

### Challenges ###
This ain't easy:
- Learning assembly programming
- Math... boolean algebra
- Drawing skills for logic schematics

Practice practice practice:
- Assembly programming (MIPS)
- Schematic/logic diagram drawing
- Math and boolean algebra
- Exam is all about brain to hand coordination
- 4x study time rule - need to spend 10hr./week at least outside class hour (shit...)

### Objectives ###
Precursor to computer architecture:
- Be familiar with architectural components of a computer systemc: CPU, registers, ALU, memory, buses, etc
- Convert between decimal binary, hex notations
- Work with two's complement intergers, floats, character encodings
- Write assembly programs that use load/store, arithmetic, logic, branches, call/return, push/pop
- Understand gate-level operations of basic ALU

We want to gain a deeper understanding of computers to write code that takes the most effective advantage of the hardware we have. Making sure we don't crash systems. Gain as much performance as possible using assembly when necessary.

### Why Hardware? ###
- There are fewer people who know this low level shit. Hardware developers are needed, but there aren't many of them. CS is _not_ just about software.

Here's a program to multiply intergers by 4 in an array. Here's an implementation. Good or bad?
```C++
boolean cs147_multiply_by_4(float_array arr) {
	for(int i = 0; i < arr.size(); i++) {
		arr[i] = arr[i] * 4.0;
		// Uses floating point processor!
	}
	return true;
}
```
What about this one?
```C++
boolean cs147_multiply_by_4(int_array arr) {
	for(int i = 0; i < arr.size(); i++) {
		arr[i] = arr[i] * 4;
		// Uses interger processor!
	}
	return true;
}
```
The interger will be a faster operation as it will use the ALU inside your processor (not the floating point processor).

Here's another tricky way to optimize:
```C++
boolean cs147_multiply_by_4(int_array arr) {
	for(int i = 0; i < arr.size(); i++) {
		arr[i] = arr[i] << 2;
		// Shifts register? Not sure what's going on here. Apparently it's more efficient.
	}
	return true;
}
```

- Software dev with knowledge of hardware is like driving car with manual transmission in cruise control.
- Programs can be tuned for faster performance with smaller mem footprint and minimized execution error.
- Debugging complex software often requires knowledge of target hardware.
- Often business decisions needs prior knowledge of target hardware.

As a subject, understanding hardware needs an EE background. For CS, it can be a little overwhelming. However, we can abstract out the details of the hardware components for things like:
- Interface and operational characteristics of individual components
- Intergration of components into overall system
- Implication to hardware components

This class is essentially a handshake between software developers and hardware developers. It is very important for these two disciplines to have a common understanding of some components.

### What to Expect ###
We'll have a more hands on approach to understanding the subject, we'll review digital logic, and more.
