General Computer System Model
===================
August 31, 2015

### Computer System Model ###
- Relationship between Storage/Memory and Processor is bidirectional.
- Input and output devices are unidirectional.
- You can abstract input and output devices into one I/O subsystem.

### Address Space ###
With a 32-bit processor, you can have 2^32 possible addresses for memory. About 4GB. With a 64-bit machine, we have like... an absurd amount of address space. Essentially infinite.

We can use one other I/O pin to distinguish between addresses for memory subsystem vs the I/O subsystem. We'd call it `IOnM`. If `nM` is 1, it's I/O, if `nM` is 0, it's memory. 

The processor doesn't distinguish between what type of storage it's sending and recieving data from. It doesn't give a shit. It's all just an address.

Now, let's say with our 32-bit address space. We can take the first bit and use it as IOnM! Then we're splitting the address space down the middle. That would be a little bit of a waste though because we don't have that many I/O devices to necessitate that much address space. Instead, a better option is to specify a certain block of address space to be I/O. That could be some small chunk of the whole 32-bit address space. This is called `Memory Mapped I/O`.

Now for the cool part! Using Memory Mapped I/O, we can simplify our model into simply memory access! From the processor's perspective, everything is just an address to either push data or pull data.

### Inside the Proccessor ###
- Of course we have the ALU
- The Register File: This is temporary storage that is extremely fast, yet pretty small.
- Controller: The controller synchronizes operations in the processor. The conductor of the symphony. Very complex part of the computer.
- Clock System: provides a continues stream of bits (1,0,1,0,1,0) in a strict rhythm. The metronome of the system.

### Clock System Model ###
- There's some finite, positive amount of delay from when you ask the ALU for an operation and when the result is returned.
- We need to have a strict, reliable amount of delay so that programs can sequence. The conductor needs to have the instruments play on beat for the symphony to work. Hence, the creation of a clock system.
- I'm giving a command to the processor at time `t1`, and I expect the result by `t2`. The time delay is some static interval based on the clock speed on my processor. If it doesn't have an answer when we expect it, that's a failure and the system may crash.
- To find the processor speed, we find the period of the clock ticks. Then the frequency of the processor is defined as the reciprocal of that frequency. For example, with a 2.0GHz CPU, we have a clock cycle of 0.5 nanoseconds!
- Often, the bus speeds on your system are slower than the processor speed.

### Memory System Model ###
- Provides storage capability for information - program (instruction) and variables (data).

```C
void Memory_1K (int &info, // Value to store or return 
				boolean read, // If true, returns value at index in info
				boolean write, // If true, store info at index 
				int index) // Index of the storage array
{
	static int mem[1024]; // 1K information storage
	int i = index % 1024; // map every index to 0 - 1023

	if (read && !write)
		info = mem[i];
	else if (!read && write)
		mem[i] = info;
	// else no operation is done
	return;
}
```
This kind of relationship between the memory and the processor is bidirectional in that we can retrieve data (`info = mem[i]`) or write data (`mem[i] = info`).

- Reset sets all of the bits in memory to 0.
- You have two pins in the mem subsystem that control whether an operation is read or write.

### Register File Model ###
- Very similar to the Memory System Model. Address space is smaller, and the bidirectional data line is broken out into two unidirectional lines.
- Since there are a limited number of registers, the register file can be implemented with more parallel operation.

### Control System Model ###
- Say, you have a simple instruction `c = a + b`. That means, it needs to fetch the data from the address of `a`, then it fetches the data from the address of `b`, then it performs the addition operation, then it stores the returned value in `c`. A lot of movement back and forth between memory.
- Upon power on, Control Unit resets the system.
- Next, the program counter is set to the power address of the system.
- Control unit starts etching instruction from the address pointed to by the program counter.
- The successive steps are to decode, execute, access memory, and write memory.
- From Write step, we go back to Instruction step.
- This cycle continues until there is a power off, reset, or user instruction to halt.
