Programming
===================
September 9, 2015

### What is a program? ###
- Not just a Java or C program
- Defined as: a plan of action to accomplish a specified end
- How do we instruct others to follow a program?
	- Say it or write it down
	- In a language that one another will understand

The program needs to be written in a language that both the program creator and the program executor will understand! It has limited functionality, so you as a programmer need to creatively instruct the computer to solve the given problem.

### Programming Language ###
0 and 1 is the *only* language. With an electronic device, we'll see that high voltage is 1 and low voltage is 0 or whatever. This is known as `machine language`. 

With `assembly language`, we can write something close to machine code and understand it as a human. It's exact one-to-one mapping from the 0's and 1's to some instruction we can understand.

Now, assembly language is nice, but it's still pretty hard for humans to work with elegantly. So, we invented `high level languages`. For instance, C is a higher level language that we can write in very easily. Then, we have something called a `compiler` translate the high level language to assembly language. Then, something called an `assembler` will translate the assembly language into the macine code. Now, both the human and the computer can understand what the program is describing.

### Assembly Code ###
Parts of assembly code:
```Assembly
LOOP:	lw	r5, r2, 0x0	;
```
- `LOOP:` is the *label* of the instruction. This is optional.
- `lw` is the *mnemonic*. It defines which action the instruction will be performing.
- `r5`, `r2`, and `0x0` are all *arguments*. Depending on the mnemonic, they're optional or required.
- Finally, each instruction must end with a semicolon.

#### MIPS Assembly Code Types ####
- Three types of instructions:
	- Register or R type
		- `add	r3, r2, r1; // r3 = r2 + r1`
	- Immediate or I type
		- `addi r1, r1, 0xA; // r1 = r1 + 0xA`
	- Jump or J type
		- `jmp	L2; // goto label L2`

Converting these instructions to machine code is a pretty tricky process. See his slides for the detailed information on how to do it. Essentially you just look at the blueprint of how the instruction is expected to come in machine code, then translate the instructions directly to binary in the proper slots.

#### Role of the Assembly Code ####
- Output code for a compiler
- To write a program

Sometimes you'll want to write assembly code directly to ensure the most efficient performance of your program. When you use a compiler and a high level language, it tends to add more overhead to compensate for generalized operation. Often, when you absolutely need a consistent response time in your program, you'll want to write the program directly in assembly to make sure compiler revisions don't fuck with it.

### Pros and Cons of Assembly Coding ###
- Pros
	- Time critical part of program can be made faster with constant time response
	- Exploit specialized instructions
- Cons
	- Machine specific
	- Longer to write / less productive
	- Easy to make mistakes and have bugs
	- Not intuitive. Hard to understand
