Integer Representation
===================
September 2, 2015

### Different Representations ###
- Decimal using 0..9 [base 10]
- Binary using 0 and 1 [base 2]
- Octal using 0..7 [base 8]
- Hexadecimal 0..9, a..f [base 16]

So let's look at `10101`.
- In decimal, we see ten thousand one hundred and one. We're using 0..9.
- In hex, we change the base to 16. Now we're shakey on understanding what that number is.
- In octal, same deal. We have no clue what that number is really.
- In binary, again, we don't know what that number is.

To understand or really percieve what these numbers are in bases other than decimal, we'd need to convert them to decimal.

We don't actually know what any number is unless the base is specified.

### Converting to Decimal ###
You can look up the formula in his slides. Other than that, just use a tool to convert. Why wouldn't you?

35AF in base 16 = 3 * 16^3 + 5 * 16^2 + 10 * 16^1 + 15 * 16^0 

### Converting from Decimal ###
We can write something like this:
```C
// num stores a value in base 10
// will convert to base K
// solution will have digits in an array
index = 0;
while (num != 0) {
	remainder = num % K; // assume K > 1
	num		  = num / K; // intefer division
	digit[index] = remainder;
	index++;
}
```

### Format Conversion ###
Convert `76_10` to 8-bit binary form:
`76_10 / 2_10 = 38_10 => Remainder = 0`
`38_10 / 2_10 = 19_10 => Remainder = 0`
`19_10 / 2_10 = 9_10  => Remainder = 1`
`9_10 / 2_10  = 4_10  => Remainder = 1`
`4_10 / 2_10  = 2_10  => Remainder = 0`
`2_10 / 2_10  = 1_10  => Remainder = 0`
`1_10 / 2_10  = 0_10  => Remainder = 1` <-- Most significant bit

So, we need to include all 8 bits because it specified 8-bit binary. We can jsut fill 0's at the top. Also, read the answer from bottom to top. So the answer here is `01001100`. Cool!

Let's try again with a different method:
`76_10` to 8-bit binary form.
Using decimal weight, we look at...
`2^0 = 1`
`2^1 = 2`
`2^2 = 4`
`2^3 = 8`
`2^4 = 16`
`2^5 = 32`
`2^6 = 64`
`2^7 = 128`

So, start out with the decimal number. Then we go down the list of numbers...

128 > 76, so the MSB is 0.
64 < 76, so the next bit is 1. Now the anchor number is 76 - 64 = 12.
32 > 12, so the next bit is 0.
16 > 12, so the next bit is 0.
8 < 12, so the next bit is 1. Now the anchor number is 12 - 8 = 4.
4 <= 4, so the next bit is 1. Now the anchor number is 4 - 4 = 0. Now that we hit 0, we fill the remaning bits with 0.
Next bit = 0.
Next bit = 0.
Final answer = 01001100. Same as above. Radical!

Now, we can convert to decimal from binary pretty easily. For instance...
`10101001` in decimal is `128 + 32 + 8 + 1 = 169`. Just take the decimal weight of the bit and sum it up!

Decimal to hex is a little trickier. Example:
`15434_10` in hex form.
`15434_10 / 16_10`
... damn, he went too quick. Review his slides.

Hex to decimal:
`D5C23_16`
Same sort of deal as binary to decimal.
`16^0 = 1`
`16^2 = 16`
`16^3 = 256`
... etc
Take the position of the bit and multiply by the decimal weight.

You can also just map 4-bit binary patterns between hex and binary. Such a sexy trick.

### Negative Integer Representation ###
- How to represent negative numbers in binary? There is no `-` sign in the electronic computer world.
- One way is to use sign and magnintude representation of binary numbers using one bit as the sign bit.
	- Should the sign bit be MSB or LSB?
	- May need an extra step for a sign-magnitude ALU to determine the sign of the result.
	- The system has two zeros!!! +0 and -0??
- MSB is used as the sign bit.
	- `01100011 = 99_10`

- How to represent negative numbers in binary? There is no `-` sign in the electronic computer world.
- One way is to use sign and magnintude representation of binary numbers using one bit as the sign bit.
	- Should the sign bit be MSB or LSB?
	- May need an extra step for a sign-magnitude ALU to determine the sign of the result.
	- The system has two zeros!!! +0 and -0??
- MSB is used as the sign bit.
	- `01100011 = 99_10`

- How to represent negative numbers in binary? There is no `-` sign in the electronic computer world.
- One way is to use sign and magnintude representation of binary numbers using one bit as the sign bit.
	- Should the sign bit be MSB or LSB?
	- May need an extra step for a sign-magnitude ALU to determine the sign of the result.
	- The system has two zeros!!! +0 and -0??
- MSB is used as the sign bit:
	- `01100011 = 99_10`
	- `11100011 = -99_10`

There's also 2's complement form:
- Represent andy +ve binary number with leading 0 and any -ve number with leading 1.
- For a 4-bit binary range, we can have +7 to -8.
- There is no problem of two zeros.
- There is no need for weird cicruit designs.
- Look at his slides to see the way it works
	- Basically, takes the binary space and flips between positive and negative every 7 digits.
- Very hard to conceptualize, but easy to develop hardware with this method and it's pretty easy for a computer algorithm to calculate.

Jeeze. Check out his slides to see how to convert from decimal to 8-bit 2's compliment form. It's a little different.
