Executable Generation
===================
September 14, 2015

### The Big Picture ###
So, you have your source files. The assembler will turn the source files into object files, then the linker will take all of those object files and combine them with all the referenced libraries into a final executable. These object files you created can't generally be run directly on the processor, but the linker will make sure that to have all the infomation needed to execute the program is included in there.

### Intermediate File ###
- Assembler produces single object file from single assembly source code.
- Object file contains:
	- Machine code instructions
	- Book keeping operations
- Source code can contain references to objects

### Assembler ###
- Two step process
	- Find memory location of the labels
	- Combine numeric equivalent of
		- Opcode
		- Register Specifiers
		- Labels

#### Step 1 ####
So first, we start with parsing the instruction (comma delimitation, semicolons, etc). It breaks it down into what's called a `lexeme`. Then, it creates a symbol table - if it hits a label, then it stores the address in memory associated with that label name.

Additionally, you can use a forward reference. That's when you tell it to go to a certain label that hasn't been defined yet. Since we can use this feature, it has to go through all of the instructions twice to fill the symbol table before generating the machine code.

#### Step 2 ####
Now, we go through all of the instructions again, and whenever we hit a label, we can refer to the symbol table that was generated in Step 1 to produce the correct memory address for the labels we encounter!

### Global and Local Labels ###
Local labels are just that... local. A label you define in one assembly file can't be used outside of that assembly file.

Now, global labels are just that... global. Before your label, you can add a `.globl` just before defining your label. If you add that line, then eventually when all of the object files are linked together, the linker will be able to find the address of that label if it ends up getting used in different assembly files.

Two separate programs can have the same local label name, but you have to have unique global label names or your program will get super confused.

### One Pass Assembly ###
- Used to make fast object code generation
	- Leave the forward reference to be patched later
- Need to hold the entire object in memory
- Impose challenge for machine with variable length format

Basically, when it hits a forward referenced label, it will hold that instruction in memory until the end of the assembling is done. Then, it goes and back patches the lines with the address of the forward referenced labels.

### Object File Format ###
There's a lot of junk in here. Look at his slide to see the frame of what's included.

### Additional Facilities ###
- Data layout directives
	- Provides easier way to describe data
- Macros
	- Provides way to shorten code writing for repetitive codes

- Pseudo instructions
	- Combines two or more fundamental instructions into one single instruction

So let's look at the data layout for a string:
```Assembly
my_str:
		.asciiz "The sum from 0 .. 100 is %d\n" // The natural way of doing it

my_str:
		.byte  84, 104, 101, 32, 115, 117, 109, 32
		.byte  84, 104, 101, 32, 115, 117, 109, 32
		...etc. // The explicit definition using byte code.
```
Somewhere inside memory, it forms an array of ascii characters in a straight block.

### Macros ###
- Simple pattern matchnig and replacement facility
- Provides mechanism to name frequently used code sequences

=================
Right here, my laptop died, so that's the end of these notes. See his slides if you're missing something here! :)
