Memory
===================
September 23, 2015

### Memory Specifics ###
The register is super fast, yes, but it's only 32x32-bits of space! That's not much to work with. So we have RAM. 

With RAM, we have a memory address range of 4GB (`0x0000 0000 - 0xffff ffff`). There are some reserved spaces within that range. See his slides to see exactly which range goes with which data type:
- Reserved: can't touch dis
- Text: the program itself
- Static Data: statically defined in program
- Dynamic Data: malloc, new, where dynamic data in your program is allocated from
- Stack: function calls
- The rest of the memory is used by the OS kernel for its programs

Different processors have different memory models. For the MARS memory model, used by the MIPS processor, check out his slides for the specific way the address space is laid out.

### Global Variables ###

So check this out:
```C
int a = 10; // Every function can access this global variable!
			// however, this is considered a local variable to the
			// program itself.

int main()
{
	// Main program using 'a'
}

int *foobar()
{
	int b = 15; // A local variable unavailable outside of foobar

	// another function using 'a'
}
```
To have a truly global variable, we need to use `extern` to define a variable that every program in the space can access. For more information, look here: [http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1041866/in-c-source-what-is-the-effect-of-extern-c]

We'll do a lab next class to become more familiar with `extern` and global variables in general.

### Memory Read/Write Instructions ###
- MIPS provides only one variant of address computation for read/wrie instruction into memory: `displacement addressing`.
	- Target address is content of a register plus sign extended immediate 16-bit encoded in the instruction.
- To load values to register from memory:
	- Load word: `lw $rt, lmm($rs) // R[rt] = M[R[rs]+SignExt(lmm)]`
	- Load half word unsigned: `lhu $rt, lmm($rs) // R[rt] = {16'b0, M[R[rs]+SignExt(lmm)](15:0)}`
	- Load byte unsigned: `lbu $rt, lmm($rs) // R[rt] = {24'b0, M[R[rs] + SignExt(lmm)](7:0)}`

The commands to load values **from** register to memory are similar, but they dont have an unsigned value type.

### Native / Pseudo load / store ###
Sometimes the assembler will do some funky stiff to the memory access instruction in case the standard displacement ddressing cannot reach the requested address.

Check out experiment 9 and see what the assembler does with your native instructions.

### Endianess - Big or Little ###
```Assembly
.include "cs47_macro.asm"

.data
var_a: .byte 0x10			# 8-bit short
var_b: .half 0x3210			# 16-bit medium
var_c: .word 0x76543210		# 32-bit long

.text
.globl main
main:
	lb $s0, var_a
	lh $s1, var_b
	lw $s2, var_c
exit
```
Basically, do we store those with the upper byte at the lower address (`Big Endian`), or does the upper byte go to the upper address (`Little Endian`)? Both are correct, depending on the architecture you're using! x86 assembly is big endian for instance.
